docs/adr: Bad encoding fraud proof ADR (#492)
celestiaorg/celestia-node: docs/adr/adr-006-fraud-service.md

 
## 1. Bad Encoding Fraud Proof (BEFP)
## Context

In the case where a Full Node receives `ErrByzantineRow`/`ErrByzantineCol` from the [rsmt2d](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d) library, it generates a fraud proof and broadcasts it to Light Nodes such that the Light Nodes are notified that the corresponding block could be malicious.

## Decision

BEFPs are addressed in the two below issues:

- https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/4
- https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/263

## Detailed Design
A fraud proof is generated if recovered data does not match with its respective row/column roots during block reparation. 

The result of RepairExtendedDataSquare will be an error [ErrByzantineRow](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/f34ec414859fc834835ea97ed54300404eec1ac5/extendeddatacrossword.go#L18-L22)/[ErrByzantineCol](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/f34ec414859fc834835ea97ed54300404eec1ac5/extendeddatacrossword.go#L28-L32):

- Both errors consist of 
  - row/column numbers that do not match with the Merkle root
  - shares that were successfully repaired and verified (all correct shares).

> Base on `ErrByzantineRow`/`ErrByzantineCol` internal fields we should generate a [MerkleProofs](https://github.com/celestiaorg/nmt/blob/master/proof.go#L17) for respective verified shares from [nmt](https://github.com/celestiaorg/nmt/blob/master/nmt.go) tree return as the `ErrBadEncoding` from `RetrieveData`. 

Author: Yes, MerkleProofs are generating for all non-nil shares

```go
type ErrBadEncoding struct {
   Shares []*Share

>    Position uint8

Author: This is the number of row/col where ErrByzantineRow/ErrByzantineColl occurred.

>    Position uint8

Reviewer: Should comment that

>    Position uint8

Author: Added comments for `Shares` and `Position`

   isRow bool
}

type Share struct {
   Share []byte
   Proof nmt.Proof
}
```

In addition, `das.Daser`:

1. Creates a BEFP:

```go
const (
   BadEncoding FraudProofType = "BadEncoding"
)

> type BadEncoding struct {

Author: Yeah, sounds good.

> type BadEncoding struct {

Author: removed type field from Proto message and from struct

   Type FraudProofType
   Height uint64
   Shares []*Share
   Position uint8
   isRow bool
}
```

2. Notify all light nodes via separate sub-service via proto message:

```proto3

message MerkleProof {
  int64          total     = 1;
  int64          index     = 2;
  bytes          leaf_hash = 3;
  repeated bytes aunts     = 4;
}

message Share {
   bytes Share = 1;
   MerkleProof Proof = 2;
}

message BadEnconding {
   required string Type = 1;
   required uint64 Height = 2;
   repeated Share Shares = 3;
   uint8 Position = 4;
   bool isRow = 5;
}
```

> Data serialization/deserialization will be performed with `protobuf.Marshal`/`protobuf.Unmarshal`.

Author: removed

> `das.Daser` imports a data structure that implements `proof.FraudNotifier` interface that uses libp2p.pubsub under the hood:

Reviewer 2: Can you clarify this is for the `FullNode` implementation only?

```go

> // FraudNotifier is a generic interface that sends a different kinds of fraud proofs to all subscribed on particular topic nodes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// FraudNotifier is a generic interface that sends a `Proof` to all nodes subscribed on the FraudNotifier's topic.
```

type FraudNotifier interface {
   // Broadcast takes a Fraud proof data stucture that implements standart BinaryMarshal interface and sends data to light nodes using libp2p pub-sub under the hood.
   Notify(ctx context.Context, p Proof)  
}
```

```go

> // FraudProofType is a enum type that represents particular fraud proof

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// FraudProofType is a enum type that represents a particular type of fraud proof.
```

type FraudProofType string

> // Proof is a generic interface that will be used for all types of fraud proofs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// Proof is a generic interface that will be used for all types of fraud proofs in the network.
```

type Proof interface {
   Type() FraudProofType
   Height() (uint64, error)
   Validate(*header.ExtendedHeader) error

   encoding.BinaryMarshaller
   encoding.BinaryUnmarshaller
}
```

> From the other side, light nodes have the ability to subscribe to a particular fraud proof update and verify received data:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2a. From the other side, light nodes will, by default, subscribe to the BEFP topic and verify messages received on the topic:
```

```go
// Subscriber encompasses the behavior necessary to
// subscribe/unsubscribe from new FraudProofs events from the
// network.
type Subscriber interface {
   // Subscribe allows to subscribe on pub sub topic by it's type

>    Subscribe(ctx context.Context, proofType FraudProofType) (Subscription, error)

Reviewer 2: I think here we can just have `Subscribe(ctx context.Context) (Subscription, error)` since we will have implementations of `Subscriber` for the different fraud proof types we implement that will automatically subscribe to BEFP (for example) under the hood.

Reviewer 2: Ignore this - `Subscription` should be created on start.

}
```

```go

> // Subscription provides only valid proofs, because the validation is done under the hood of pub-sub

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// Subscription returns a valid proof if one is received on the topic.
```

type Subscription interface {

>    Proof() (Proof, error)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Proof() (Proof, error)
   Cancel() error
```

}

> type FraudSub struct {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// FraudSub implements Subscription.
type FraudSub struct {
```

   pubsub *pubsub.PubSub 
}

> func NewFraudSub(p *pubsub.PubSub)(Subscription, error){}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
func NewFraudSub(p *pubsub.PubSub)(Subscription, error)
```

func(s *FraudSub) Proof() (Proof, error){}
```

```go

> // NOTE: re-think how FraudService should be designed(and constructed) for full nodes and for light nodes

Reviewer 2: Yes, we should have separate types for this IMO. Nothing should do both.

Reviewer 3: We have two interfaces that do different things and it is not necessary to have different implementations rn. If needed we can split the implementation into two segregated components doing Broad or Sub, but for now, having one component doing both is not an issue.

type FraudService struct {

>    badEncodingSub Subscription

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   fraudSub Subscription
```

since this can be generically used for any type of fraud proof right?

Author: Yes, but does this particular subscription correspond to BEFP? And for MessageInclusionProof we will add new field

   fraudNotifier FraudNotifier
}

> func(f *FraudService) Subscribe(ctx context.Context, proofType FraudProofType) (Subscription, error){}

Reviewer 2: fraud service doesn't implement `Subscriber`, it implements `Subscription`.

So it needs these methods:

``` 
Proof()
Cancel()
```

as they're described on #L132

Author: added

func(f *FraudService) Notify(ctx context.Context, p Proof){}
```
### BEFP verification
Once a light node receives a `BadEncoding` fraud proof, it should:

> * verify that merkle proofs corresponds to particular shares(if merkle proof does not correspond to a share, than this BEFP is not valid)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* verify that merkle proofs correspond to particular shares. If the merkle proof does not correspond to a share, then the BEFP is not valid.
```

> * using `BadEncoding.Shares` light node should re-construct full row or col, compute it's merkle root as in [rsmt2d](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/master/extendeddatacrossword.go#L410) and compare it with merkle root that could be retreived from `dah.DataAvailabilityHeader`(if merkle roots do not match, then this BEFP is not valid)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* using `BadEncoding.Shares`, light node should re-construct full row or column, compute its merkle root as in [rsmt2d](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/master/extendeddatacrossword.go#L410) and compare it with merkle root that could be retrieved from the `DataAvailabilityHeader` inside the `ExtendedHeader`. If merkle roots do not match, then the BEFP is not valid.
```

Light node should stop `DAS`, `Syncer` and `SubmitTx` services, in case if BEFP is valid.

> ## Status

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Bridge node behaviour
Bridge nodes will behave as light nodes do by subscribing to BEFP fraud sub and listening for BEFPs. If a BEFP is received, it will similarly shut down all dependent services, including broadcasting new `ExtendedHeader`s to the network.

## Status
```

   encoding.BinaryUnmarshaller
}
```

2a. From the other side, light nodes will, by default, subscribe to the BEFP topic and verify messages received on the topic:

```go
// Subscriber encompasses the behavior necessary to
// subscribe/unsubscribe from new FraudProofs events from the
// network.
type Subscriber interface {
   // Subscribe allows to subscribe on pub sub topic by it's type
   Subscribe(ctx context.Context, proofType FraudProofType) (Subscription, error)
}
```

```go
// Subscription returns a valid proof if one is received on the topic.
type Subscription interface {
   Proof() (Proof, error)
   Cancel() error
}

// FraudSub implements Subscription.
type FraudSub struct {
   pubsub *pubsub.PubSub 
}

func NewFraudSub(p *pubsub.PubSub)(Subscription, error){}
func(s *FraudSub) Proof() (Proof, error){}
func(s *FraudSub) Cancel() error{}
```

```go
type FraudService struct {
   fraudSub Subscription
   fraudNotifier FraudNotifier
}

func(s *FraudService) Proof() (Proof, error){}
func(s *FraudSub) Cancel() error{}
func(f *FraudService) Notify(ctx context.Context, p Proof){}
```
### BEFP verification
Once a light node receives a `BadEncoding` fraud proof, it should:

> * verify that merkle proofs correspond to particular shares. If the merkle proof does not correspond to a share, then the BEFP is not valid.

Reviewer: Nit, but Merkle should be capitalized everywhere it's used in text.

Author: made them capitalized.

# ADR #006: Celestia-Node Fraud Service

## Changelog

- 2022.03.03 - init commit
- 2022.03.08 - added pub-sub
- 2022.03.15 - added BEFP verification

## Authors

@vgonkivs @Bidon15 @adlerjohn @Wondertan @renaynay
 
## Bad Encoding Fraud Proof (BEFP)

> ## Context

Author: wdym?

- Both errors consist of 
  - row/column numbers that do not match with the Merkle root
  - shares that were successfully repaired and verified (all correct shares).

Based on `ErrByzantineRow`/`ErrByzantineCol` internal fields, we should generate a [MerkleProofs](https://github.com/celestiaorg/nmt/blob/master/proof.go#L17) for respective verified shares from [nmt](https://github.com/celestiaorg/nmt/blob/master/nmt.go) tree return as the `ErrBadEncoding` from `RetrieveData`. 

```go
type ErrBadEncoding struct {
   // Shares contains all shares from row/col.
   // For non-nil shares MerkleProof is computed
   Shares []*Share
   // Position represents the number of row/col where ErrByzantineRow/ErrByzantineColl occurred
   Position uint8
   isRow bool
}

type Share struct {
   Share []byte
   Proof nmt.Proof
}
```

In addition, `das.Daser`:

1. Creates a BEFP:

```go
const (

>    BadEncoding FraudProofType = "BadEncoding"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   BadEncoding ProofType = "BadEncoding"
```

   encoding.BinaryMarshaller
}
```

2a. From the other side, light nodes will, by default, subscribe to the BEFP topic and verify messages received on the topic:

```go
type proofUnmarshaller func([]byte)Proof
// Subscriber encompasses the behavior necessary to
// subscribe/unsubscribe from new FraudProofs events from the
// network.
type Subscriber interface {
   // Subscribe allows to subscribe on pub sub topic by it's type.
   // Subscribe should register pub-sub validator on topic.
   Subscribe(ctx context.Context, proofType ProofType) (Subscription, error)
   // RegisterUnmarshaller registers unmarshller for particular ProofType.
   // If there is no umarshaller for `ProofType` then `Subscribe` should return an error.
   RegisterUnmarshaller(proofType ProofType, f proofUnmarshaller) error
}
```

```go
// Subscription returns a valid proof if one is received on the topic.
type Subscription interface {
   Proof() (Proof, error)
   Cancel() error
}
```

```go
// FraudSub implements Subscriber and Broadcaster.
type FraudSub struct {
   pubsub *pubsub.PubSub
   topics map[ProofType]*pubsub.Topic
   unmarshallers map[ProofType]proofUnmarshaller
}

> func(s *FraudService) RegisterUnmarshaller(proofType ProofType, f proofUnmarshaller) error{}

Reviewer 3: Would be nice to have the Unregister as well

> func(s *FraudService) RegisterUnmarshaller(proofType ProofType, f proofUnmarshaller) error{}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
func(s *FraudService) RegisterUnmarshaller(proofType ProofType, f proofUnmarshaller) error{}
func(s *FraudService) UnregisterUnmarshaller(proofType ProofType) error{}

```

# ADR #006: Celestia-Node Fraud Service

## Changelog

- 2022.03.03 - init commit
- 2022.03.08 - added pub-sub
- 2022.03.15 - added BEFP verification

## Authors

@vgonkivs @Bidon15 @adlerjohn @Wondertan @renaynay
 
## Bad Encoding Fraud Proof (BEFP)
## Context

In the case where a Full Node receives `ErrByzantineRow`/`ErrByzantineCol` from the [rsmt2d](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d) library, it generates a fraud-proof and broadcasts it to DA network such that the light nodes are notified that the corresponding block could be malicious.

## Decision

> BEFPs are addressed in the two below issues:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
BEFPs were first addressed in the two issues below:
```

- https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/4
- https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/263

## Detailed Design
A fraud proof is generated if recovered data does not match with its respective row/column roots during block reparation. 

> The result of RepairExtendedDataSquare will be an error [ErrByzantineRow](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/f34ec414859fc834835ea97ed54300404eec1ac5/extendeddatacrossword.go#L18-L22)/[ErrByzantineCol](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/f34ec414859fc834835ea97ed54300404eec1ac5/extendeddatacrossword.go#L28-L32):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The result of `RepairExtendedDataSquare` will be an error [`ErrByzantineRow`](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/f34ec414859fc834835ea97ed54300404eec1ac5/extendeddatacrossword.go#L18-L22)/[`ErrByzantineCol`](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/f34ec414859fc834835ea97ed54300404eec1ac5/extendeddatacrossword.go#L28-L32):
```

- Both errors consist of 
  - row/column numbers that do not match with the Merkle root
  - shares that were successfully repaired and verified (all correct shares).

> Based on `ErrByzantineRow`/`ErrByzantineCol` internal fields, we should generate a [MerkleProofs](https://github.com/celestiaorg/nmt/blob/master/proof.go#L17) for respective verified shares from [nmt](https://github.com/celestiaorg/nmt/blob/master/nmt.go) tree return as the `ErrBadEncoding` from `RetrieveData`. 

Reviewer 4: I think this can be the repo for the nmt link instead:
```suggestion
Based on `ErrByzantineRow`/`ErrByzantineCol` internal fields, we should generate a [MerkleProofs](https://github.com/celestiaorg/nmt/blob/master/proof.go#L17) for respective verified shares from [nmt](https://github.com/celestiaorg/nmt) tree return as the `ErrBadEncoding` from `RetrieveData`. 
```

```go
type ErrBadEncoding struct {
   // Shares contains all shares from row/col.
   // For non-nil shares MerkleProof is computed
   Shares []*Share

>    // Position represents the number of row/col where ErrByzantineRow/ErrByzantineColl occurred

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   // Position represents the number of row/col where ErrByzantineRow/ErrByzantineColl occurred.
```

   Position uint8
   isRow bool
}

type Share struct {
   Share []byte

>    Proof nmt.Proof

Reviewer 4: I think, later, we might be able to optimize this by not repeating the inner nodes several times per share where it makes sense.

}
```

In addition, `das.Daser`:

1. Creates a BEFP:

```go
const (
   BadEncoding ProofType = "BadEncoding"
)

> type BadEncoding struct {

Reviewer 4: Should we call this type `BadEncodingProof`?

Author: updated

type proofUnmarshaller func([]byte) Proof
// Subscriber encompasses the behavior necessary to
// subscribe/unsubscribe from new FraudProofs events from the
// network.
type Subscriber interface {
   // Subscribe allows to subscribe on pub sub topic by it's type.
   // Subscribe should register pub-sub validator on topic.
   Subscribe(ctx context.Context, proofType ProofType) (Subscription, error)
   // RegisterUnmarshaller registers unmarshaller for the given ProofType.
   // If there is no umarshaller for `ProofType`, then `Subscribe` returns an error.
   RegisterUnmarshaller(proofType ProofType, f proofUnmarshaller) error
   // UnregisterUnmarshaller removes unmarshaller for the given ProofType.
   // If there is no unmarshaller for `ProofType`, then it returns an error.
   UnregisterUnmarshaller(proofType ProofType) error{}
}
```

```go
// Subscription returns a valid proof if one is received on the topic.
type Subscription interface {
   Proof() (Proof, error)
   Cancel() error
}
```

```go
// FraudSub implements Subscriber and Broadcaster.
type FraudSub struct {
   pubsub *pubsub.PubSub
   topics map[ProofType]*pubsub.Topic
   unmarshallers map[ProofType]proofUnmarshaller
}

> func(s *FraudService) RegisterUnmarshaller(proofType ProofType, f proofUnmarshaller) error{}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
func(fs *FraudSub) RegisterUnmarshaller(proofType ProofType, f proofUnmarshaller) error{}|
```

and apply to other method definitions

func(s *FraudService) UnregisterUnmarshaller(proofType ProofType) error{}

func(s *FraudService) Subscribe(ctx context.Context, proofType ProofType) (Subscription, error){}
func(s *FraudService) Broadcast(ctx context.Context, p Proof) error{}
```
### BEFP verification
Once a light node receives a `BadEncoding` fraud proof, it should:
* verify that Merkle proofs correspond to particular shares. If the Merkle proof does not correspond to a share, then the BEFP is not valid.

> * using `BadEncoding.Shares`, light node should re-construct full row or column, compute its Merkle root as in [rsmt2d](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/master/extendeddatacrossword.go#L410) and compare it with Merkle root that could be retrieved from the `DataAvailabilityHeader` inside the `ExtendedHeader`. If Merkle roots do not match, then the BEFP is not valid.

Reviewer 4: Use perma-links to code (instead of relative links on master).

}
```

`das.Daser` imports a data structure that implements `proof.Broadcaster` interface that uses libp2p.pubsub under the hood:

```go
// Broadcaster is a generic interface that sends a `Proof` to all nodes subscribed on the Broadcaster's topic.
type Broadcaster interface {
   // Broadcast takes a fraud `Proof` data structure that implements standard BinaryMarshal interface and broadcasts it to all subscribed peers.
   Broadcast(ctx context.Context, p Proof)  
}
```

```go
// FraudProofType is a enum type that represents a particular type of fraud proof.

> type ProofType string

Reviewer 2: `Change the docs for this from `FraudProofType` --> `ProofType`

Author: done

// Proof is a generic interface that will be used for all types of fraud proofs in the network.
type Proof interface {
   Type() ProofType
   Height() (uint64, error)
   Validate(*header.ExtendedHeader) error

   encoding.BinaryMarshaller
}
```

2a. From the other side, light nodes will, by default, subscribe to the BEFP topic and verify messages received on the topic:

```go

> type proofUnmarshaller func([]byte)Proof

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
type proofUnmarshaller func([]byte) Proof
```

   Proof() (Proof, error)
   Cancel() error
}
```

```go
// FraudSub implements Subscriber and Broadcaster.
type FraudSub struct {
   pubsub *pubsub.PubSub
   topics map[ProofType]*pubsub.Topic
   unmarshallers map[ProofType]proofUnmarshaller
}

func(s *FraudService) RegisterUnmarshaller(proofType ProofType, f proofUnmarshaller) error{}
func(s *FraudService) Subscribe(ctx context.Context, proofType ProofType) (Subscription, error){}

> func(s *FraudService) Broadcast(ctx context.Context, p Proof){}

Reviewer 2: How will it know which topic to Broadcast it to? You have to type check on the given proof?

Author: by calling `p.Type()` inside.
